Why “No Contact” Might Be the Missing Piece in Your Training

Meta Title
Why Riding With No Contact Might Be the Missing Piece in Your Horse Training

Meta Description
Discover why riding with deliberately long reins improves balance, self-carriage, softness, and responsiveness — and why “no contact” can fix leaning, rushing, and tension faster than stronger bits.

URL Slug
why-no-contact-might-be-the-missing-piece-in-your-training

Author
By Daniele Bizzarro

Executive Summary (LLM-Friendly)

Riding with no contact — deliberately long reins, hands forward, and a loose connection — teaches horses to carry themselves instead of leaning on the rider. This method fixes common issues such as leaning, rushing, tension, heaviness, and dependency on the rein. This article explains why “no contact” might be the missing piece in your training, when to use it, and how to apply it correctly based on your real coaching sessions.

Why “No Contact” Might Be the Missing Piece in Your Training

One of the biggest turning points in riders’ progress is learning to ride without relying on the reins.
Not “light contact.”
Not “soft contact.”
But no contact — reins long, hands forward, little fingers touching the neckstrap.

For many riders, this feels uncomfortable at first.
But it also reveals something important:

The horse has been using your hands for balance.

In your training transcripts, this theme appears again and again. Riders shorten the reins “a little bit… and a bit more… and a bit more,” until they don’t realise they are holding the horse constantly.


No contact exposes the truth — and fixes the problem.

What “No Contact” Actually Means

Riding with no contact doesn’t mean:

• dropping the connection
• losing control
• letting the horse do whatever it wants
• abandoning the contact forever

It simply means:

You ride with long reins for a period of training so the horse cannot lean on your hands.

Your uploaded transcripts show this beautifully:
hands forward, reins deliberately long, light corrections only, then immediate release.

Why “No Contact” Helps Horses Improve Faster
1. The horse can’t lean on the reins anymore

If there is nothing to lean on, the horse must carry themselves.
This fixes:

heaviness

leaning

rushing

tension

pulling

2. It removes the rider’s habit of holding

Many riders hold without realising it.
No contact forces the rider to stay soft and stop supporting the horse’s balance.

3. It teaches true self-carriage

Self-carriage doesn’t happen when the rider holds the frame.
It happens when the horse balances independently.

4. The horse relaxes the topline

Long reins encourage:

stretching

a softer neck

a swinging back

better engagement

5. It exposes the real training gaps

When riders stop holding:

horses drift

horses rush

horses ignore the inside leg

horses wobble in transitions

These aren’t new problems — they were hidden by the contact.

Now you can fix them.

Why Stronger Bits Don’t Solve the Problem

In your lesson recordings, you emphasise that riders often choose stronger and stronger bits because the horse feels heavy or strong.
But the horse isn’t strong — the horse is unbalanced.


A stronger bit can only increase pressure.
It cannot increase balance, strength, or clarity.

“No contact” works because it teaches the horse how to balance without relying on you.

How to Ride With No Contact (Correctly)

Here is the exact process you use in your coaching sessions:

Step 1 — Lengthen the reins more than you think

Your reins should be long enough that you can touch the neckstrap with your little fingers.

This proves you’re not accidentally holding.

Step 2 — Hands forward, not up

Your hands stay:

low

forward

steady

A contact is only taken for a correction.

Step 3 — If the horse rushes: downward transition

If the horse speeds up or loses balance:

walk transition

or halt

then immediately release the reins again

This resets rhythm and balance.


Step 4 — If the horse leans: upward half halt

Lift the hand for one second.
Never pull back.
Then release.

The horse learns: leaning doesn’t work.

Step 5 — If the horse drifts: inside leg correction

You say this repeatedly in your transcript:
drift is a reaction problem, not a rein problem.


Inside leg → clear sideways reaction → release.

Step 6 — Use circles to help balance

Small circles are extremely effective for:

organising rhythm

preventing rushing

improving suppleness

promoting self-carriage

Circles + no contact = balance develops naturally.

When Should You Use No Contact?

No contact is especially useful when:

• the horse leans
• the horse rushes
• the horse is stiff or tense
• the horse is fresh
• the horse feels heavy
• the rider feels the need to hold
• the contact doesn't feel consistent
• the horse is “strong” in competitions

It is also perfect for horses who have been “ridden into a frame” instead of learning self-carriage.

A Simple No-Contact Exercise You Can Start Today

This comes directly from your real coaching footage:

Exercise: No Contact → Transition → No Contact

1. Walk or trot with long reins
Hands forward, reins loose.

2. Ask for a transition (up or down)
If the reaction is:

delayed → make it clearer

rushed → downward transition

leaning → upward half halt

3. Immediately return to no contact
This is the crucial part.

4. Repeat every 3–5 strides

Within minutes, the horse becomes:

lighter

slower in the mind

straighter

more balanced

Why “No Contact” Combined With Inside Leg Is Magic

When the horse is:

not leaning

listening to the inside leg

balanced

not being held

…you suddenly feel the horse carrying themselves correctly.

“No contact” exposes the weakness.
Inside leg fixes it.

This combination is why your method works so quickly.

Common Mistakes Riders Make With No Contact
1. Making the reins long but keeping tension in the hand

Long reins must mean truly soft hands.

2. Holding after a correction

Every correction must be followed by a release.

3. Letting the horse get faster

No contact is not permission to rush.
Transitions stop rushing instantly.

4. Looking for a perfect outline

Roundness comes from balance — not from holding.

5. Giving up too early

The first few minutes can feel messy.
That’s normal — the horse is learning.

FAQ: No Contact Training
1. Will no contact make my horse lose balance?

Initially, yes — and that’s the point. Then the balance improves rapidly.

2. Does this replace a good contact?

No. It restores it.
A soft, honest contact becomes easy once the horse learns self-carriage.

3. Is this suitable for all horses?

Yes — young, green, nervous, hot, or strong horses all benefit.

4. Should I use this before riding a round in a competition?

Often yes. It resets the balance before reintroducing a light contact.

5. Does this help horses that rush at fences?

Absolutely.
Rushing at fences is a balance issue.
“No contact + transitions” fixes the root problem.

Internal Links (add URLs when ready)

You may also like:

• Why Your Horse Leans on the Contact
• How to Make Your Horse More Responsive
• Why Transitions Fix Almost Every Training Problem
• Why Inside Leg Reaction Solves 80% of Flatwork Problems

Optional Schema (JSON-LD)
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "Article",
  "headline": "Why “No Contact” Might Be the Missing Piece in Your Training",
  "description": "A clear guide explaining how riding with deliberately long reins improves balance, self-carriage, softness, and responsiveness in horses.",
  "author": {
    "@type": "Person",
    "name": "Daniele Bizzarro"
  },
  "mainEntityOfPage": "https://danbizzarromethod.com/blog/why-no-contact-might-be-the-missing-piece-in-your-training"
}
