Olivia: Dan is a great instructor, in lessons he always helps me work hard and have fun which has helped me improve so much. Thanks to Dan, I've become a better rider and have learned so many valuable skills.

[05/01/2024, 21:42] Dimah Roddick, Lessons: From Hannah: Dan's experience with horses makes him an excellent instructor. I have found the exercises he provides are really helpful and have improved my riding a lot. If I am worried he breaks down the exercise into smaller steps which really boosts my confidence and helps me know how to deal with situations that make me nervous.

[05/01/2024, 21:56] Dimah Roddick, Lessons: And from me:
Dan is absolutely fantastic! He creates a calm, positive and fun learning environment, and is genuinely passionate about helping each horse and rider improve. Dan’s wealth of experience in training horses and riders of all ages and stages is evident in the remarkable progress my daughters and their ponies are making. Dan’s clear and effective teaching method has transformed their riding and results. I also really enjoy my lessons with Dan and come away with a clear plan on how to continue progressing. I couldn't be happier with the guidance he provides!

“Dan’s coaching is an absolute class apart from all the others . Every lesson throws up something to work on to improve plus it’s progressive and logical always showing how the little things make such a difference …okay is not good enough ….with effort patience and dedication ….improvement is rewarded. Coaching is an art and Dan inspires me always to improve. From sometimes stroppy and quirky I now have a calm happy focused girl wanting to please.”
Sue Dear

Dan has been coaching my daughter Grace and a very “green” 15hh horse (“Flicker”) for over two years, and has been absolutely inspirational. He has progressed Grace and Flicker from being a capable but unskilled team, to one that is regularly fighting for winning honours at 90 ODE’s.
Dan is incredibly knowledgeable and his passion for teaching shines through in every lesson. He tailors EVERY lesson to what the rider and horse needs and puts 110% of his energy into developing the rider and horse to their full potential. His ability to communicate what he is teaching in a straightforward way no matter the level of rider is definitely his USP.
Having sat on the sidelines for two years watching my daughter’s lessons I finally plucked up courage and started having lessons myself. Dan has an incredibly calm relaxed attitude which puts even the most nervous of riders at ease. I always come away from every lesson on a high and my confidence has grown exponentially. I’ve gone from saying I’ll never jump to pinging over XC fences at Lyneham this summer! I can’t recommend Dan highly enough to riders looking for truly exceptional coaching - and he has a great sense of humour too!
Emma Chapple 

Dan has been teaching me and my horse Primrose for a number of years now . Even though I don’t compete anymore I still have a weekly lesson with him . It keeps our minds and bodies active . My horse is now 22 yrs old and thanks to Dan is still fit and supple . He makes every lesson fun and is always thinking of new and interesting exercises to do .
Fiona McKenzie 

Dan’s tuition and detailed training has helped me improve my riding way more than I expected. He provides real encouragement and tailored individual coaching that allows both horse and rider to develop their potential.
Ben Atkinson 

I have been training with Dan for the last four and a half years and he’s brought on my riding in countless ways and helped me achieve many of my goals. Each session is different and specific to what needs working on at that moment in time, he always has methods and exercises that tackle an issue head on to produce the best performance from not only me but also my horse. He’s helped me in producing my youngster who has needed a lot of fine tuning to make him into the horse I wish him to be and has helped me get on track with achieving this. Dan’s continued to support with training, pre-season planning and ability to remain calm in all situations amazes me, as with reassurance, he continues to demonstrate methods to tackle each problem in order for effective results and improvement for my horse and I.
Katie Ball 