Why Your Horse Rushes — And How to Fix It in 30 Seconds

If your horse feels fast, quick, or ahead of you, you’re not alone — rushing is one of the most common issues I see in lessons. And there’s a simple reason: rushing always comes from imbalance, not bad behaviour.

Horses don’t wake up thinking, “Today I’m going to tank off.”
They rush when they feel they’re losing balance, so they speed up to catch themselves.

The good news?
You can fix this in less than 30 seconds.

In the Dan Bizzarro Method, we always address the cause, not the speed — and that’s why this works so quickly.

The 4 Real Reasons Horses Rush
1. Loss of Balance

When the shoulders fall forward or the horse gets long, they run to rebalance themselves.

You’ll feel:

the trot get fast and flat

the canter lose its jump

the horse “pulling you” forward

2. Tension

Some horses rush when:

they’re excited,

fresh,

spooky,

or anxious.

Tension turns into speed.

3. Leaning on the Contact

A horse that leans will always feel quicker than it is.
They use your hand instead of their hind legs.

4. Rider Habits

This is a big one.
If you ride with:

tight hands,

gripping legs,

or a slightly tipped-forward posture,

…the horse speeds up to support you.

None of these problems are personality traits.
They’re balance issues — which means they’re fixable.

The Fastest Fix: The 30-Second Reset

Every time a horse rushes, you can fix it with one of three simple tools.
These are core principles of the Dan Bizzarro Method because they teach balance, clarity, and self-carriage without force.

1. Downward Transition (Resets Balance)

This is the quickest and most reliable correction.

If the horse rushes → transition to walk.
If needed, transition to halt.

The key is this:

Correct for one second, then soften.
Hands forward straight after the transition.

This helps the horse rebalance without feeling trapped.

Use this when the rushing feels like:

loss of control,

leaning,

big canter,

loss of rhythm.

Why it works:
The moment the horse slows, the shoulders lift and balance returns.

2. Small Circle (Organises Rhythm)

If the horse gets quick but still feels rideable, choose a small circle.

A 10–12m circle:

slows the stride naturally,

improves the horse’s inside-hind engagement,

reduces tension,

and resets rhythm without pulling.

Use this when the rushing feels like:

excitement,

tension,

distraction,

tightness.

Why it works:
The curve makes the horse rebalance without the rider doing more.

3. Half Halt Upward (Stops Leaning)

If the horse leans down onto your hands, use:

a momentary upward half halt (lift the hand),

one second only,

then soft hands forward.

Use this when the rushing feels like:

heaviness,

leaning,

the horse “pulling you out of the saddle.”

Why it works:
Lifting the hand reminds the horse to carry their own shoulders.

The Method That Makes the 30-Second Fix Work

The correction is only half of the solution.
The other half — and this is where riders often go wrong — is the RELEASE.

You correct for one second → then immediately soften.

This is a fundamental part of the Dan Bizzarro Method.

Why?
Because holding creates:

tension,

leaning,

bracing,

more rushing.

The release teaches the horse:
“You fix your balance — and I’ll stay out of your way.”

This is how true self-carriage develops.

A Simple Exercise to Stop Rushing in Minutes

Here’s a routine I use in lessons all the time:

Exercise: Transition → Circle → Release

Start in trot or canter.
Find a rhythm.

If the horse rushes, ride a downward transition.
Walk → soften → trot again.

Ride a 10m circle.
Focus on a calm rhythm.

Go straight and soften your hands completely.
Allow the horse to carry themselves.

Repeat anytime the horse speeds up.

Most horses improve within 2–3 repetitions.

Signs the Horse Is No Longer Rushing

You’ll feel:

softer contact

a slower breathing pattern

hind legs stepping under

shoulders lifting

rhythm becoming regular

the horse waiting

This is correct, calm forwardness — not “slow,” but balanced.

Common Mistakes Riders Make When Fixing Rushing
1. Holding the horse instead of correcting and releasing

This makes rushing worse.

2. Pulling on both reins

The horse will either lean or fight.

3. Pushing the horse too much

Forwardness is not speed.
Speed is a symptom.

4. Ignoring the first quick step

Rushing starts with one stride — correct early.

5. Getting tense

Your body is the horse’s tempo setter.
If you get quick, they will too.

FAQ: Why Your Horse Rushes
1. Is my horse rushing because they’re excited?

Excitement contributes, but the root is balance.

2. Will a stronger bit help?

No.
Bits don’t create balance — training does.

3. Should I slow the trot by pulling?

Never.
Use transitions and circles instead.

4. Can young or green horses learn not to rush?

Absolutely — this method is ideal for young horses because it teaches balance early.

5. Does this help in show jumping?

Yes — a horse that doesn’t rush is easier to see a stride on and safer between fences.

Internal Links (add URLs when live)

You may also like:

• How to Make Your Horse More Responsive
• Why Inside Leg Reaction Solves 80% of Flatwork Problems
• Why Transitions Fix Almost Every Training Problem
• Why Your Horse Leans on the Contact

Optional Schema (JSON-LD)
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "Article",
  "headline": "Why Your Horse Rushes — And How to Fix It in 30 Seconds",
  "description": "Learn why horses rush and how to fix it quickly using simple, effective corrections from the Dan Bizzarro Method.",
  "author": {
    "@type": "Person",
    "name": "Daniele Bizzarro"
  },
  "mainEntityOfPage": "https://danbizzarromethod.com/blog/why-your-horse-rushes"
}
