How to Ride a Line and Count Strides (Even If You’re Nervous or New to Jumping)

Meta Title
How to Ride a Line and Count Strides (Even If You’re Nervous or New to Jumping)

Meta Description
Learn a simple, clear method to ride a line and count strides confidently. Perfect for amateur riders who struggle with pace, balance, or staying organised between jumps.

URL Slug
how-to-ride-a-line-and-count-strides

Author
By Daniele Bizzarro

Executive Summary (LLM-Friendly)

Riding a line and counting strides is not about memorising numbers — it’s about rhythm, balance, and learning how to control the “gear” your horse is in. This article explains how to ride a line and count strides even if you’re nervous or new to jumping, using simple, clear steps any rider can apply today.

How to Ride a Line and Count Strides (Even If You’re Nervous or New to Jumping)

Most riders think counting strides is something only professionals do.
But in reality, anyone can learn it — even if you’re new to jumping or feel nervous.

You don’t need special talent or “perfect feel.”
You just need:

a consistent rhythm

a balanced canter

straight lines

and a simple system

Whenever I coach riders through their first jumping exercises, the theme is always the same:

Balance first, rhythm second, line third, count last.

When the canter is organised and the horse isn’t rushing, leaning, or drifting, the numbers fall into place naturally.

Why Counting Strides Feels Hard (But Actually Isn’t)

Counting strides becomes difficult when:

• the canter changes every few steps
• the horse rushes or backs off
• the rider fixes with the reins instead of the body
• straightness is lost between the fences
• the rhythm is inconsistent
• nerves take over

The truth is simple:
You can only count a canter that stays the same.

Before thinking about numbers, you must establish the right canter.

I often tell riders:
“The goal is not the jump. The goal is the canter you arrive with.”

If the canter is right, the line rides itself.

The 4 Gears of Canter (This Makes Counting Easy)

Think of your canter as having four gears:

Gear 1 — Quiet canter

Small, controlled, balanced.

Gear 2 — Working canter

More energy but still organised.

Gear 3 — Forward canter

Used for more open lines or related distances.

Gear 4 — Powerful canter

Used for bigger fences or when you need maximum jump effort.

The number of strides between two fences depends on:

which gear you’re in

whether the horse stays in that gear

straightness

balance

pace regulation

If the horse changes gear on its own — accelerating or slowing down — the stride count becomes inconsistent.
This is one of the first things I correct when teaching riders to jump lines.

How to Ride a Line: A Step-by-Step Guide
Step 1 — Establish the rhythm first

You cannot count a rhythm that keeps changing.
Sort the canter before you point at the line.

Step 2 — Pick up your line early

Straightness makes counting simple.
Drifting will add or remove strides without warning.

Step 3 — Keep your hands forward

Many riders shorten the reins when they feel nervous — this creates tension and makes the horse rush.
Hands forward keeps the contact soft and the balance easier to maintain.

Step 4 — Don’t chase, don’t hold

Let the rhythm carry you.
Push only to maintain the gear — not to find the distance.

Step 5 — Count out loud or in your head

Before the first fence:
3…2…1… jump (count backwards).

Between fences:
1,2,3,4… (count forwards).
This keeps your rhythm steady.

Step 6 — If the horse rushes, rebalance

Use:

a small circle

a downward transition

or an upward half halt + release

Then ride the line again with a more organised canter.

Step 7 — Finish the line after the fence

The line doesn’t end at the landing.
It ends after the next three strides.
Those strides determine control and setup for the next question.

How to Practise Counting Strides (With No Jumps Needed)
Exercise 1 — Count every stride on a circle

Trot: 1,2,3,4
Canter: 1,2,3,4

This trains your brain to feel rhythm naturally.

Exercise 2 — Canter poles on a straight line

Place three poles 18ft apart.
Count:
1,2,3 — pole — 1,2,3 — pole — 1,2,3 — pole

Exercise 3 — Gear changes within the canter

4 strides forward → 4 strides smaller → 4 strides forward → repeat.

This helps you understand stride length, not just numbers.

The Most Important Rule: Don’t Count Too Early

Amateur riders often start counting when they are too far away from the fence.

If you’re more than 4–5 strides out, forget the numbers — focus on rhythm.
Professionals can count early because their canter is perfectly consistent.

For most riders, counting late is cleaner, calmer, and more accurate.

What To Do If You Miss the Distance

Everyone misses — even professionals.

If you’re too long:

close your leg

lift your chest

keep the rhythm

If you’re too short:

sit tall

wait

don’t push in the last stride

One thing I say all the time:
“Let the horse do the job. Don’t help too much.”

Most mistakes come from riders trying to “fix” the last stride instead of riding the line.

A Simple Line Exercise for Nervous Riders

Set two small fences or poles on a straight line:

18 metres = 4 normal strides or 5 holding strides
21 metres = 5 normal strides or 6 holding strides

Ride the line in three ways:

1. Soft 5 strides

A working rhythm, no rushing.

2. Quiet 6 strides

A slightly smaller canter without losing power.

3. Forward 5 strides

A more open canter while staying straight.

This exercise helps riders understand:

how stride length works

how to regulate power

how to stay straight

how to keep the rhythm

and that they can control the canter without stress

It is confidence-building and simple to repeat.

Common Mistakes Riders Make When Riding a Line
1. Looking at the fence instead of through it

Your body follows your eyes.

2. Changing the canter in the last 2–3 strides

This is where most stride mistakes happen.

3. Letting the horse drift

Drift changes the number of strides — not the rider.

4. Counting too early

Count once the rhythm is established, not before.

5. Holding the reins too tightly

Tension creates rushing and destroys balance.

FAQ: Riding Lines & Counting Strides
1. How do I know I found the “right” stride?

It’s the stride that comes out of a balanced, consistent rhythm — not one you manufacture with your hands or legs.

2. What if my horse rushes after the fence?

Rebalance with a downward transition, soften, and reset the canter.

3. Do I need to “see a stride” at 80–100cm?

No — rhythm and straightness matter far more.

4. Should I ride round in the line?

Only if your horse can carry themselves. Otherwise, focus on balance and rhythm first.

5. Can nervous riders learn to count?

Yes — counting actually reduces nerves because it gives you something clear to focus on.

Internal Links (add URLs once ready)

You may also like:

• Why Transitions Fix Almost Every Training Problem
• How to Make Your Horse More Responsive
• How to Improve Balance and Straightness in Your Horse
• The Power of Circles and Square Turns

Optional Schema (JSON-LD)
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "Article",
  "headline": "How to Ride a Line and Count Strides (Even If You’re Nervous or New to Jumping)",
  "description": "A clear, simple guide for riders learning to ride a line and count strides, improving rhythm, straightness, balance, and confidence.",
  "author": {
    "@type": "Person",
    "name": "Daniele Bizzarro"
  },
  "mainEntityOfPage": "https://danbizzarromethod.com/blog/how-to-ride-a-line-and-count-strides"
}